This is Dr. Robert and Jeremy Jones.
Do you use the middle initial, don't you ask?
No.
What's your title here?
Well, I run the Near and Middle East Department, otherwise known as the Islamic Department, which specializes in books, European books, about the Middle East from as early as we can go to the early 20th century.
So the formation of states in
in Arabia and the Arabian Gulf region relating to the modern period.
And we also handle documents relating to the Middle East, for example.
We've recently handled early 15th century Venetian letters, quite a big collection of them.
sent by Venetian merchants in the Levant to each other in different parts of the Levant or to colleagues and family in Venice.
We've also recently handled quite a large collection of what are known as Turkica, so 16th century pamphlets.
How would you spell that?
Turkica, T-U-R-C-I-C-A, Turkica.
which are ephemeral items in that they were published as a result of Turkish incursions into Central Europe, mainly in Germany and in Italy, so you find there are Roman prints, Venetian imprints, and publications from various parts of Germany, a bit in France, but relating the tale of the
Turks as they came westwards.
You said that you came here 13 years ago?
13, yeah.
Was this straight out of graduate school?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And I was delighted to find there was something other than academic pursuits related to my specialist knowledge.
Before I had the machine, you had indicated that you studied at Durham?
Durham, Isfahan.
In Iran.
the Warburg Institute in London University, and SOAS, which is the School of Oriental and African Studies.
And the intention all along was to be a researcher?
No, particularly I just followed my interests.
I didn't have a clear interest in particularly taking on an academic job.
If anything, I look for something else.
So I'm a bit of a maverick.
I still do lecture when asked.
So the academic interest persists.
I'm just finishing a book now on Renaissance Arabic studies in Europe, which will be out later this year.
Will that be published here in the U.J.?
It will be published in Holland by E.J.
Brill, your interest.
It's called Learning Arabic in Renaissance Europe, and it's the study of how people acquired manuscripts and text.
That's fascinating.
How the people they met, the Arabic speakers they met.
And there's quite a technical section on grammar and how you write an Arabic grammar book in Europe in 1580.
So it's quite a hot subject, actually, since I did the research for that.
There's been one or two, like a book, so...
What specifically is the subject?
The subject that you're writing on, or Arabic studies in general?
No, specifically 16th and early 17th century in Europe.
So it's the birth of Orientalism, a subject which has been banded around a lot.
Do you find that with this renaissance of interest, that the interest in the books, that the value of these books, is there a relation between what you do
Well, it's a pretty esoteric interest.
I mean, I remember the first time I went to the Gulf, I arrived in Kuwait in the second half of the 80s, and I was amazed to find somebody there at home who had a very nice lot of reference books, including some pretty important
bibliographical guides to Arabic, early Arabic printing.
And we sort of sat and consulted and discussed all these things.
So, you know, but that kind of interest is very rare.
About 18 months ago, I went to Dubai for a conference on the history of Arabic printing.
But that was sort of printing in the Arab world as well as in Europe.
I'm not sure that it necessarily alters the
But the whole value of Middle Eastern books has risen, honestly, in the last 10 years.
I've witnessed it.
Now, you came to work here in 84, approximately?
Yeah.
Did this create a new department here?
So there must have been some perception there that this is an area that the company had to... It's always been something that Quaridge has handled, right from the very first catalogue, actually.
you'll find material in one way or another relates to the Middle East.
And he was handling quite a lot of manuscript material early on that Paul Crawford was buying.
In the 20th century, Chester Beatty was a great customer of ours, and many of the good number.
Chester Beatty, whose collection is in Dublin now, was acquiring a good deal of
Arabic manuscript and version manuscript material and miniatures from Quaritch at that time.
But in the last, the John Rylands Library actually has quite a holding of Arabic manuscripts that came via the Crawford collection.
But back from Quaritch, no.
It's always been a tradition, but there wasn't a specialist.
There were specialists at that time.
There was somebody in particular, John Kearney, who read these various languages and cataloged this material for Lord Crawford as well.
But there hasn't been a specialist in the subject.
I mean, it has got much more specialized sort of travel.
Do you find, I think you suggested, you implied earlier that you really deal with collections and not individual homes?
I tend to, but that's, you know, because, you know, it's just been the way that I've developed the particular time base that I have.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
I mean, there are plenty of Middle East booksellers who produce lists of books.
But would you say then that these are the kinds of collections that are
especially valuable for their research?
It could be for research.
They could be more sort of for ornament.
I mean, there are some fabulous illustrating books.
There's a whole range of reasons why anybody would want to acquire books on the region.
I mean, some people are purely interested in research aspects, others are interested for a more aesthetic point of view.
But do you find that with the increased interest in recent years in that region, for any number of reasons that we all know about, do you find that institutional libraries are keen on enhancing their collections?
I think, well, if you're talking about the Middle East, that was a big thing in the 70s, say, in the Arab world.
with the rise of these oil powers and their revenues, particularly after about 1973.
But I think it was sort of imitative of Western institutions.
It wasn't really something that they had a very good grip on at that time.
And so quite big purchases were made in that period.
by institutions, but I wouldn't say that's been followed up since in a very aggressive way.
And now I think you find the good deal more discernment 20 years on, 25 years on.
So I haven't noticed really a sort of very strong institutional interest there.
I mean, it's there, but it's not
It's not as active as I'd like it to be.
No kidding.
In America, again, I think, you know, the pattern of Middle Eastern purchases has been tended to be, particularly with manuscripts, collections.
Again, a collection at Princeton, a collection at Chicago, a collection at UCLA.
I mean, all of these are sort of one-off collections.
I'm not aware of a sort of
for the pattern of acquisitions in that field, and the same in this country, in Europe.
It's not, you know, Cambridge University or whatever, in the Welcome Library here.
There's not really, I wouldn't say that the institutional
But that may be my perception.
I'm sure it's my perception, and it's because I haven't particularly pursued that market.
Now, with this collection that we have here, this rather extensive library that I guess has been consigned, the logical place for that to be, I would think, would be a university library.
Yeah, yeah, maybe.
I'm not really in a position to discuss that collection at the moment because it's in the process of being marketed.
Is it the kind of thing that you do a catalogue of?
Not a published catalogue.
It's a private placement.
So without discussing that collection at all, how do you go about marketing something like that?
You don't publish a catalog and you don't advertise it.
You know, we've built up a whole network of contacts over the years and just pursue those people.
But, I mean, it's not like an auction house saying, okay, everybody turn up on such and such a date.
It's actually just pursuing the individuals that we know to bear attention.
What makes it very interesting to me as well is the fact that
Apparently you have the mandate to sell on a block.
We're not in a position to discuss it, you see.
I'm sorry.
I mean, this can happen until we get a mandate to sell something on behalf of somebody.
But, I mean, that's perfectly normal way to pursue it.
There are collections, generic collections, that are worth more as collections.
I suppose there's a little premium involved in the effort that somebody's put into performing a collection, and that can be dissipated by breaking up the collection.
But by the same token, anybody who's buying is obviously going to like it.
some sort of deal in the fact that they're acquiring a totality rather than a few odd books.
Books both ways.
Well, of course, once they have it, they can do whatever they want with that, too.
Yeah.
Can you think of anything to ask Dr. James?
Yeah, it was quite impressive.
Quite, quite magnificent.
I'm going to give you my card, okay?
I didn't know that we'd be talking, so I have to... Two manuscripts in the Bodleian were acquired in Central Europe after battles with the Turks.
In fact, there were a couple of quite interesting cases of Qurans.
See, because they had a kind of talismanic power and were carried on journeys and into battle,
And so if a tarrant was captured or after a battle there was booty to be had.
Funnily enough, these Qurans attracted a tremendous amount of interest among scholars and eventually found their way back to the courts and to the scholars who wanted to read the Qurans for one
very essential reason, that is because it's the only Arabic text which is consistently vocalized.
Because most Arabic is written in an outline, like shorthand, and you can't really read it unless you've got the vowels there, or you know the grammar very well.
Because they didn't know any grammar, the only kind of piece of Arabic they could read would be a Quran where all the vowels are written in.
You know, it's an irony.
Oh, go ahead.
It's an irony.
And all these manuscripts ended up in... I'll send you a copy of the article.
I'll just ask where I can get it, because this is what we're writing about.
Again, it's... I'll send you this, because you may never get a story out of it.
It's quite an exciting story.
It's a little kind of a nugget that I'm looking for.
I like that.
And could you send... Do you have a little CV on yourself that you could send along, too?
Yeah.
You won't forget now.
I'd like to know how it's going to be put to use.
Okay.
That's fair.
We're still a full two years away.
I haven't even started writing yet.
The projected date of publication is Fall 99, on the eve of the new millennium, you see.
So it's... I mean, the subtitle is Book People, Book Places, and Book Culture on the Eve of the New Millennium.
And the title is from Milton, Life Beyond Life, from the famous quote in the
The precious lifeblood of the master spirit being books.
Preserved and served up unto a life beyond life, I think.
Don't hold me to the literal truth.
But that's just a very... You might get something... Piracy?
Oh, it was Paris.
Sorry, what were you asking?
You said it was piracy or... Piracy, yeah, piracy.
No, piracy, piracy.
As in... Boats.
As in Blackbeard.
Pugwash.
Maybe he's not an American.
Or Blackbeard.
They just found his flagship off the coast of North Carolina.
I saw that.
Well, I think this was impromptu.
Let's really thank you.
I'll give you a comment.
Would you?
That'd be great.
and then the main major national libraries have incredible collections I mean that's one of the extraordinary things is that these major libraries in Europe have incredible Middle East collections and it's due to the collecting of manuscripts in the West from 15th century onwards and relations with the Christian Arabic churches in the Levant
the interest in the Ottoman world, all sorts of reasons, and an intellectual interest in Islam, combating Islam from that day.
You have to understand and read the Quran in order to refute it, you see.
And people are realizing that you can't just hold up, stem the tide of Islam by the sword.
You need to be able to argue the case.
And for that they needed sources that they could understand them.
And you find incredible treasures in Western libraries that came into our libraries from that time.
And it stems precisely from that?
From a conflict.
Yeah.
And do you document any of these?
Yeah, I do.
And I document the particular manuscripts.
I mean, there are some quite magnificent manuscripts.
in this article here?
Yeah.
Oh, you must read this article.
That's what I'm looking for.
And this book that you're publishing?
Well, that will come out in a while, and that's really, it's quite technical, actually.
There are some other stories.
But I... I hope it'll be out there.
I think you'll find some
I read at Harvard.
They get everything there, which is great.
So I'll do a run on your name, and I'm sure all sorts of things will pop up.
Any other articles that you've done that... I think that would be probably one that would... Yeah, but there are... If you run across there, you won't skimp.
Send it along.
I'll be happy, you know, to go over whatever quotes I use.
I would appreciate that, actually, because it is very new material and relatively new.
And it probably hasn't had the urine that it should do.
I think it is becoming a subject.
If you look at my other book, everything I use is fully cited.
Everyone is given proper credit for...
for their contributions, because I do pride myself in doing a very nice bibliography and a good textual apparatus.
Well, I'm looking forward to seeing you.
Good.
Thanks a lot for your time.
I'm sorry.